Updates for WebTransport OT (#5029)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/webtransport/index.md

  - api
---

## Background

### What's WebTransport?

> [WebTransport](https://w3c.github.io/webtransport/) is a web API that uses the [HTTP/3](https://quicwg.org/base-drafts/draft-ietf-quic-http.html) protocol as a bidirectional transport. It's intended for two-way communications between a web client and an HTTP/3 server. It supports sending data both unreliably via its [datagram APIs](#datagram), and reliably via its [streams APIs](#stream).

Reviewer: Should we have a little comment that says something like "formerly known as QuicTransport", or do you think it's obvious?

Author: There's an `Aside` that goes into detail about that at https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/5029/files#diff-b8c695635c07b4dffc40aa857ab06919d35d0217dfa6dba4c817c0c1411daa20R43-R47

I think that should suffice, rather than also calling it out here?

Reviewer 2: The aside seems fine to me. I'd take Pete's side if this were a name change for something in production like change from 'Feature Policy' to 'Permissions Policy'.

[Datagrams](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-quic-datagram-00) are ideal for sending and receiving data that do not need strong delivery guarantees. Individual packets of data are limited in size by the [maximum transmission unit (MTU)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximum_transmission_unit) of the underlying connection, and may or may not be transmitted successfully, and if they are transferred, they may arrive in an arbitrary order. These characteristics make the datagram APIs ideal for low-latency, best-effort data transmission. You can think of datagrams as [user datagram protocol (UDP)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_Datagram_Protocol) messages, but encrypted and congestion-controlled.

> The streams APIs, in contrast, provide [reliable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reliability_(computer_networking)), ordered data transfer. They're [well-suited](https://quicwg.org/base-drafts/draft-ietf-quic-transport.html#name-streams) to scenarios where you need to send or receive one or more streams of ordered data. Using multiple WebTransport streams is analogous to establishing multiple [TCP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_Control_Protocol) connections, but since HTTP/3 uses the lighter-weight [QUIC](https://www.chromium.org/quic) protocol under the hood, the can be opened and closed without as much overhead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The streams APIs, in contrast, provide [reliable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reliability_(computer_networking)), ordered data transfer. They're [well-suited](https://quicwg.org/base-drafts/draft-ietf-quic-transport.html#name-streams) to scenarios where you need to send or receive one or more streams of ordered data. Using multiple WebTransport streams is analogous to establishing multiple [TCP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_Control_Protocol) connections, but since HTTP/3 uses the lighter-weight [QUIC](https://www.chromium.org/quic) protocol under the hood, they can be opened and closed without as much overhead.
```

### Use cases

This a small list of possible ways developers might use WebTransport.

- Sending game state at a regular interval with minimal latency to a server via small, unreliable, out-of-order messages.
- Receiving media streams pushed from a server with minimal latency, independent of other data streams.
- Receiving notifications pushed from a server while a web page is open.

> As part of the origin trial process, we're interested in [hearing more](#feedback) about how you plan on using WebTransport!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As part of the origin trial process, we're interested in [hearing more](#feedback) about how you plan to use WebTransport.
```

{% Aside %}

> Many of the concepts in this proposal were previously experimented with as part of the earlier [QuicTransport](https://chromestatus.com/feature/4854144902889472) Origin Trial, which did not end up being released as part of Chrome.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many of the concepts in this proposal were previously experimented with as part of the earlier [QuicTransport](https://chromestatus.com/feature/4854144902889472) origin trial, which did not end up being released as part of Chrome.
```

> WebTransport helps with similar use cases as QuicTransport, with the primary difference being that [HTTP/3](https://quicwg.org/base-drafts/draft-ietf-quic-http.html) is used as the underlying transport protocol, instead of using [QUIC](https://www.chromium.org/quic) directly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WebTransport helps with similar use cases as QuicTransport, with the primary difference being that [HTTP/3](https://quicwg.org/base-drafts/draft-ietf-quic-http.html) instead of [QUIC](https://www.chromium.org/quic) is the underlying transport protocol.
```

{% endAside %}

## Current status {: #status }

<div class="w-table-wrapper">

| Step                                       | Status                       |
| ------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------- |
| 1. Create explainer                        | [Complete](https://github.com/w3c/webtransport/blob/main/explainer.md) |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification   | [Complete](https://w3c.github.io/webtransport/) |
| **3. Gather feedback and iterate design**  | [**In Progress**](#feedback) |

> | **4. Origin trial**                        | [**In Progress**](#register-for-ot) |

Reviewer: There's no origin trial for this currently is there?

Author: @yutakahirano just sent out the [Intent to Experiment](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/g/blink-dev/c/aaLFxzw5zL4), so I assume the OT will start in the near future, in time for M91.

This PR can't be merged until the OT details are available, and ideally until @vasilvv is able to update the sample code to reflect the new interfaces.

Reviewer 2: If this ends up in 91 beta and the samples don't get updated, can we call that out and merge anyway? I'll need to link to this article from the beta post.

Author: As long as the OT is active, yes, I think we should merge, and get the samples updated out-of-band.

(The updates in this won't be of much use if the OT isn't active, though, so I am still waiting to confirm that and swap in the new OT signup link.)

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't put this in the post if the OT weren't active.

Author: It's now active: https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/793759434324049921

  - api
---

## Background

### What's WebTransport?

> [WebTransport](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/) is a web API that uses the [HTTP/3](https://quicwg.org/base-drafts/draft-ietf-quic-http.html) protocol as a bidirectional transport. It's intended for two-way communications between a web client and an HTTP/3 server. It supports sending data both unreliably via its [datagram APIs](#datagram), and reliably via its [streams APIs](#stream).

Reviewer 3: Now we can use https://w3c.github.io/webtransport.

| Step                                       | Status                       |
| ------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------- |

> | 1. Create explainer                        | [Complete](https://github.com/WICG/web-transport/blob/master/explainer.md) |

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/w3c/webtransport/blob/main/explainer.md

> | 2. Create initial draft of specification   | [Complete](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/) |

Reviewer 3: https://w3c.github.io/webtransport/

The WebTransport API was designed with the web developer use cases in mind, and should feel more like writing modern web platform code than using WebRTC's data channel interfaces. [Unlike WebRTC](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=302019), WebTransport is supported inside of [Web Workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Using_web_workers), which allows you to perform client-server communications independent of a given HTML page. Because WebTransport exposes a [Streams](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org/)-compliant interface, it supports optimizations around [backpressure](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org/#backpressure).

However, if you already have a working WebRTC client/server setup that you're happy with, switching to WebTransport may not offer many advantages.

## Try it out

> The best way to experiment with WebTransport is to use [this Python code](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/samples/blob/gh-pages/webtransport/web_transport_server.py) to start up a compatible HTTP/3 server locally. You can then use this page with a [basic JavaScript client](https://googlechrome.github.io/samples/webtransport/client.html) to try out client/server communications.

Author: I am assuming that @vasilvv will be able to update this sample code and that these will be the relevant URLs. This is something else that needs to be completed before this PR is merged.

Reviewer 3: The client script should work with replacing the "quic-transport" scheme with "https".

Author: Gotcha. Is there an equivalent WebTransport over HTTP/3 server script that's available, though? Or is there a public server that Google or a standards group is running that folks could connect to?

### Streams APIs  {: #stream }

Once you've connected to the server, you could also use WebTransport to send and receive data via its Streams APIs.

Each chunk of all streams is a `Uint8Array`. Unlike with the Datagram APIs, these streams are reliable. But each stream is independent, so data order across streams is not guaranteed.

#### SendStream

> A <code>[SendStream](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/#sendstream)</code> is created by the web client using the <code>createSendStream()</code> method of a `WebTransport` instance, which returns a promise for the <code>SendStream</code>.

Reviewer: ProTip: you can write that as:

```
A [`SendStream`](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/#sendstream)</code> is created...
```

That'll respect the code blocks and you don't have to use the `<code>` element wrapper.

Author: That syntax was auto-generated by a Google Docs ➡️  Markdown export tool, so it was easier to just leave it as-is. 😄

Reviewer 2: You should check the preview. I Don't think markdown inside tags will be rendered. I think it will be escaped.

Author: It looks fine to me: https://deploy-preview-5029--web-dev-staging.netlify.app/webtransport/#sendstream
